A 67-year-old woman was evaluated at this hospital because of headache and retro-orbital pain.

The patient had been in her usual state of health until 10 months before the current admission, when a photosensitive, erythematous, papular rash developed on the forearms a few weeks after she had started treatment with hydrochlorothiazide. Over the next 7 months, an intermittent, painless, nonpruritic, erythematous, annular rash developed on the trunk and the proximal portions of the arms and legs.

Three months before the current presentation, the rashes worsened, and the patient was evaluated by a dermatologist at another hospital. The thyrotropin level was normal; other laboratory test results are shown in Table 1. Examination of a punch-biopsy specimen of abdominal skin reportedly showed spongiotic dermatitis with superficial perivascular lymphocytic inflammatory-cell infiltrate with eosinophils; neither vasculitis nor dermal mucin was found. The rashes were thought to be related to medication; treatment with amlodipine was started, and hydrochlorothiazide was discontinued. She was treated with topical triamcinolone ointment. The photosensitive rash on the forearms resolved, and the annular rash on the trunk abated.

Ten days after the evaluation at the first hospital, and 8 weeks before the current admission, the patient presented to the emergency department of a second hospital because of progressive temporal headache with retro-orbital pain on the left side that had lasted for 3 days. The physical examination was reportedly normal. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 12 mm per hour (reference range, 0 to 19). The complete blood count and blood levels of electrolytes, aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and total bilirubin were normal, as were the results of tests of kidney function. Computed tomography (CT) of the head was performed and reportedly showed mild periventricular white-matter disease with no acute intracranial abnormality. CT angiography of the head and neck reportedly showed no intracranial aneurysm, stenosis, or occlusion. The patient was discharged home.

The next morning, the patient awoke with double vision. The headache had resolved. She presented to a neuro-ophthalmology urgent care clinic associated with this hospital. The patient reported persistent pain in the left eye, which was worse with abduction, as well as photosensitivity and an episode of pain in the left side of the jaw in the preceding week. She had normal visual acuity, color vision, visual fields, and afferent visual function. The optic disks were normal, sharp, and flat. The left eye had esotropia and hypertropia, as well as a limitation in abduction. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 11 mm per hour, and the C-reactive protein level was 3.0 mg per liter (reference value, <8.0). A presumptive diagnosis of acute left sixth cranial nerve palsy associated with cerebral microvascular disease was considered. Corrective treatment with eye patching was recommended, and the double vision resolved over the next 3 weeks.

Eight weeks after she had presented to the emergency department of the second hospital, the patient presented to the emergency department of a third hospital because similar symptoms had developed in her right eye. She reported having headache with retro-orbital pain on the right side over the past 3 days, accompanied by changes in her color vision and occasional floaters. The physical examination was notable for a blood pressure of 159/66 mm Hg and an abduction deficit of the right eye. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 17 mm per hour (reference range, 0 to 30), and the high-sensitivity C-reactive protein level was 1.64 mg per liter (reference value, <3.00). The complete blood count and blood levels of electrolytes, albumin, aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and total bilirubin were normal, as were the results of tests of kidney function. A screening test for Lyme disease antibodies was negative.

Dr. Jeremy N. Ford: Cross-sectional imaging of the head and orbits had been performed at the first hospital, and the results were reinterpreted at the third hospital. CT of the head (Figure 1A and 1B) reportedly showed stranding of the intraconal fat in the right orbit. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography of the head, neck, and orbits (performed with and without the administration of intravenous contrast material) reportedly showed abnormal enhancement and edema of the optic nerve and surrounding tissue on the right side. On my directed review of the MRI (Figure 1C through 1F), I found that the mild edema and enhancement predominantly involved the optic-nerve sheath and intraconal fat, which confirmed the findings on CT of the head. The optic nerve itself was largely spared. The temporomandibular joints were partially visible, and there was mild periarticular edema and enhancement of the left joint. On T2-weighted imaging, scattered hyperintense foci were seen in the periventricular and subcortical white matter, a nonspecific finding most likely attributable to chronic small-vessel disease.

Dr. Walton: Intravenous methylprednisolone was administered, and the patient was transferred to the neurology unit of this hospital. On evaluation, she reported persistent double vision and pain on right lateral gaze but resolution of the retro-orbital headache. She also reported a recent mild flare of an erythematous, annular rash, as well as recent hair thinning and long-standing Raynaud’s phenomenon. Review of systems was negative for fever, night sweats, weight loss, joint erythema or swelling, muscle stiffness or pain, scalp or temple tenderness, jaw claudication, recurrent sinusitis, nasal crusting, epistaxis, cough, hoarseness, cough or shortness of breath, hemoptysis, dry mouth or dry eyes, oral ulcers, ptosis, dysphagia, dysarthria, hearing changes, paresthesia, weakness in the arms and legs, or changes in the nails. There were no gastrointestinal or urinary symptoms.

The patient had a remote history of Graves’ disease with orbitopathy that had been diagnosed and treated more than two decades before this presentation. The medical history was also notable for hypothyroidism, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, gastroesophageal reflux disease, cholecystectomy, ovary-sparing hysterectomy, and lumpectomy for estrogen receptor–positive, progesterone receptor–positive breast cancer. A surveillance mammogram obtained in the previous month had reportedly been normal. She had received three vaccines against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Medications included atorvastatin, amlodipine, levothyroxine, and tamoxifen. A rash had occurred after the previous use of hydrochlorothiazide. She was married and lived in coastal Massachusetts. She drank wine rarely and did not use tobacco or other substances. Her family history was notable for a maternal aunt with thyroid disease and a child with vitiligo.

On examination, the temporal temperature was 36.1°C, the pulse 68 beats per minute, the blood pressure 173/72 mm Hg, and the oxygen saturation 95% while the patient was breathing ambient air. A few scattered erythematous macules were present on the abdomen, including a well-healed punch-biopsy site. A few telangiectasias were observed on the face. There was no rash on the face or scalp, and no sclerodactyly was observed. The hair was normal in pattern and distribution. There was no conjunctival injection. Extraocular movements were normal except for abduction of the right eye, which was limited and caused pain. There was no proptosis or lid lag. Visual acuity was 20/25 in the left eye and 20/40 with red color desaturation in the right eye. The right optic disk appeared pale as compared with the left optic disk. The remainder of the general and neurologic examination was normal.

An electrocardiogram was normal. The complete blood count and blood levels of electrolytes, calcium, albumin, and globulin were normal; other laboratory test results are shown in Table 1. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 6 mm per hour, and the C-reactive protein level was 0.6 mg per liter. Screening tests for antibodies to hepatitis B virus core antigen, hepatitis C virus, histone, and human immunodeficiency virus were negative, as were tests for Lyme disease antibodies, syphilis antibodies, rheumatoid factor, and varicella–zoster virus IgM; varicella–zoster virus IgG was detected. A test for SARS-CoV-2 RNA, an interferon-γ release assay for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and serum and urine toxicology screens were also negative.

A lumbar puncture was performed. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was clear, with an opening pressure of 14 cm of water. Gram’s staining of the CSF showed rare mononuclear cells and no organisms. The CSF glucose level was 86 mg per deciliter (4.8 mmol per liter; reference range, 50 to 75 mg per deciliter [2.8 to 4.2 mmol per liter]), and the CSF protein level was 30 mg per deciliter (reference range, 5 to 55). There were no nucleated cells present.

On the second day, testing for antibodies to bartonella was negative. The levels of angiotensin-converting enzyme, C3, and C4 were normal, as were the results of serum free light-chain testing, serum protein electrophoresis, and urinalysis. The IgG4 level was 137.3 mg per deciliter (reference range, 3.9 to 86.4); the levels of other IgG subclasses were normal. Testing for lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibodies, and β2-glycoprotein 1 antibodies was negative, as was CSF testing for cryptococcal antigen and varicella–zoster virus IgM.

Dr. Ford: CT of the chest, performed after the administration of intravenous contrast material, showed no lymphadenopathy; there was hepatic steatosis and a 2-mm right apical nodule. MRI of the head and whole spine, performed after the administration of intravenous contrast material, showed asymmetric enhancement surrounding the intraorbital and intracanalicular segments of the right optic-nerve sheath and intraconal fat. No abnormal spinal cord enhancement was observed. Ultrasonography of the temporal arteries showed no halo sign.

Dr. Walton: A diagnostic test was performed.