A 20-year-old man diagnosed with bipolar disorder 18 months previously presents to the emergency department with haemoptysis and hypoxemia. Six weeks before the current presentation, he had been seen at another hospital for racing thoughts, generalized hyperactivity, and difficulty sleeping. During that admission, he was involved in an altercation and was struck on the left side of the chest with subsequent pain in that area which persisted together with onset of nausea, vomiting, and decreased appetite. A CT scan of the chest at that time revealed ground-glass opacities in the left lower lobe which were diagnosed as pulmonary contusions. Another week later, the patient developed urticaria with intermittent nausea and mild sore throat. Ten days before the current presentation, chest pain continued, cough developed, and nausea increased in severity, and a chest X-ray at another hospital revealed consolidation in the left lower lobe and left pleural effusion. He was treated with a course of doxycycline for presumed pneumonia and discharged home. In the five days before the current presentation, despite decreasing chest pain, the cough increased in severity and became productive of yellow sputum with dark-red streaks, and shortness of breath developed with worsening nausea. He also reported fatigue and weight loss of 5 kg since the chest injury. He had also noticed discoloration in his fingers associated with changes in temperature. There was no headache, abdominal pain, or joint pain.

His past medical history comprised asthma, migraines, and attention deficit–hyperactivity disorder. Bipolar disorder had been diagnosed when he developed mania, grandiose thoughts, and paranoid delusions. Medications included quetiapine, paliperidone, and methylphenidate. Sulfa drugs and valproate had caused rash, nausea, and vomiting. He had previously been sexually active with female partners. He drank alcohol rarely and vaped marijuana frequently but denied smoking tobacco or using illicit drugs. His mother, maternal aunt, paternal aunt, and paternal uncle all suffered depression.

On examination, temperature was 38.6°C, blood pressure 89/40 mm Hg, heart rate 121 beats per minute, respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation 98% on nasal prong oxygen at 2 litres per minute. There was dull percussion note and diminished breath sounds over the left lower lung. There were no cardiac signs and no abdominal tenderness, joint swelling, or rash. The patient had a flat affect, apathy, grandiose thoughts, poverty of speech and thought, and psychomotor retardation, but no paranoia or hallucinations. The rest of the examination was normal.

Initial investigations showed normocytic anaemia of 87 g/l but normal white cell count and platelets, except for mild lymphopenia. ESR was elevated to 83 and CRP to 80. Biochemistry showed normal electrolytes, renal function and liver function tests. Albumen was reduced to 18 g/l  and globulins were normal. Urinalysis showed 3+ protein with microurine revealing hyaline casts and microscopic haematuria. An urgent CT pulmonary angiogram shows multiple emboli in right and left segmental arteries with wedge-shaped left lower pulmonary infarction and bilateral pleural effusions. 